---
permalink: research/projects.html
layout: page
---

## Research Projects

### Transforming experiences for science and engineering students

Developing students' skills with scientific practices is key for
preparing science and engineering professionals, science educators, and,
more broadly, critical consumers of scientific information. Yet most
undergraduate instruction in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields lack opportunities for students to engage with
authentic scientific practices (e.g., developing and using models,
designing experiments, using computational modeling). Courses that
leverage scientific practices are more likely to engage students in
critical and creative ways of thinking that typically does not happen in
traditional lecture environments.

Our project, entitled [Projects and Practices in Physics
(P3)](http://pcubed.pa.msu.edu), is a community-based learning
environment for introductory mechanics that begins to investigate how
students learn to engage with scientific practices while learning
physics content. Through the study of complex problems and the use of
computational projects, students will learn core physics concepts while
engaging in the practices of doing science. In this project, we will
investigate some of the fundamental questions asked in PER, such as:

-   How do students blend conceptual knowledge, representational tools
    (e.g., mathematics, models), and computational algorithms when
    engaging in different scientific practices?
-   How does engaging students in scientific practices shape their views
    of science?
-   How do different social interactions play into the development of
    the students' use of scientific practices?

### Students' use of mathematics in upper-division physics

Upper-division physics courses introduce quantitative models that
require students to use sophisticated mathematical tools to develop an
understanding of them. In addition, students must learn to solve longer
and more complicated problems that incorporate these physical models and
mathematical tools. Our project aims to understand students'
in-the-moment reasoning about math in physics. We are currently focused
on learning environments that emphasize group problem solving and in
particular a junior level electromagnetism course. We employ a
naturalistic observations approach, which allows access to student
reasoning in learning environments that center on active group learning.
Through this approach we can uncover difficulties individual students
experience with specific models and tools.

Through analysis of our naturalistic observation data we have noticed
that students' use of math appears markedly different from other
activities in traditional problem solving. Prior to "doing math"
students have animated discussions in which they collectively set up the
problem. Subsequent to this set-up, when students are actively doing
math, they work both quietly and individually. We are conducting an
analysis to determine how students decide what math to do, how they do
it, and how they proceed after math is complete. This project allows us
to pursue the following questions:

-   How do students decide if they have sufficiently scaffolded a
    problem so that they can perform the necessary mathematics?
-   How do students determine how they will proceed after they have done
    the math?
-   What difficulties do students exhibit with these longer, more
    complicated problems?

### Examining Group Problem Solving Dynamics in Physics

When students solve problems in groups, their behaviors and strategies
are understandably different than when they work individually.
Differences in problem solving approaches, shared resources (computers,
worksheets, etc.), and gender can all affect the manner in which a group
proceeds. In this project, we hope to understand more fully the nature
of these effects.

In a study currently in progress, we examine the effects of students'
diverse problem solving strategies. Sometimes these strategies have well
defined entry and exit conditions, rules, and moves. These are known as
epistemic games. A particular epistemic game called the "answer-making"
epistemic game has been previously identified in the literature, in
which a student's goal is to arrive at an answer with some reasoning or
justification. The focus of previous of previous research on this
epistemic game has been on individual students solving multiple choice
questions.

We have begun to examine how this game might be played when students
work cooperatively in groups on problems in which they are not provided
multiple possible solutions. We hope to develop a model for how group
interaction affects the playing of the answer-making epistemic game.

In a new calculus-based mechanics course that emphasizes problem-based
learning through complex analytical problems and computational modeling
projects, we hope to address the roles of shared resources and gender on
group problem solving dynamics.

We aim to answer the following research questions:

-   How do students play the answer-making epistemic game when working
    in groups?
-   What is the effect of negotiating a shared resource when solving
    computational problems in a group?
-   What is the role of gender in the dynamics of a group when they are
    solving computational problems?

### Integrating Computation into Undergraduate Physics

Description coming soon...

### Surveying the state of computational physics in courses for physics majors

Description coming soon...

### Fostering integration of computational methods in physics courses: A local communities approach

Description coming soon...

## Other Projects

### Creating a coherent gateway for STEM teaching and learning at MSU

Michigan State University was recently awarded [a
grant](http://msutoday.msu.edu/news/2013/msu-part-of-a-national-effort-to-improve-science-math-education/)
from the [Association of American Universities'](http://www.aau.edu/)
(AAU) [Undergraduate STEM Education
Initiative](https://stemedhub.org/groups/aau) to improve their gateway
courses in biology, chemistry, and physics. As part of this project, the
Physics and Astronomy Department is holding discussions with faculty to
determine the core ideas students should learn in introductory physics
and what they should be able to do with that knowledge. These
discussions are intended to articulate specific performance expectations
for the gateway courses as well as develop assessment items to determine
if students are meeting these performance expectations. Eventually,
these discussions will become interdisciplinary in an attempt to align
the way each department teaches cross-disciplinary elements of their
curricula, such as energy. Two new instruments are being developed as
part of this project to aid the transformation and to measure and track
change in the introductory courses: one that characterizes assessments
and another that looks at both what is being taught in the classroom as
well as how it is being taught.

This project also creates a new competitive [fellowship
program](http://create4stem.msu.edu/gatewayfellowship) in which the
awarded fellows work with other members of their departments and
education researchers to study and/or improve their own courses.

### Transforming introductory physics laboratories to discovery-based experiences

The goals of many physics laboratory experiences are often tacit and
ill-defined. Combining this with the sheer numbers of students and
teaching assistants needed often results in introductory physics
laboratories that are confirmation-driven and not necessarily aligned
with the tacit goals of the faculty.

In a transformation project, funded by the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, we aim to develop laboratory activities that move students
into exploratory experiences, which leverage modeling, data, and
argumentation. The initial steps of this project include developing
consensus learning goals that make the explicit the goals that faculty
hold, and the development of pilot laboratory activities to be tested in
a subset of laboratory sections.

This project will document student experiences through classroom
observation and interviews as well as their developing/changing
attitudes and beliefs about the nature of science by using the E-CLASS.
In addition, we will evaluate the outcomes of this transformation
project through newly developed assessments that interrogate how student
use different scientific practices (e.g., modeling and argumentation).

### Professional development of graduate teaching assistants

At MSU, graduate students form the teaching corps for many of our
introductory physics courses. Helping our graduate students develop
their teaching practice is a central mission of the physics and
astronomy graduate program. In this project, we continually develop
professional development workshops and activities that new and returning
graduate teaching assistants engage with in order to develop their
instructional practice.

These activities focus on helping graduate student instructors develop
into reflective practitioners who can (a) anticipate student
difficulties and challenges with physics content and practice, (b)
respond with appropriate support and scaffolding to support student
understanding, and (c) reflect on their own teaching practices for the
purpose of improving future teaching.
